foreign
I remember being told that
in the distant past
a very learned person might hope to
understand everything that was
understood
whereas now because of specialization
because so much is known that's
impossible that one person can only
understand a very small fraction of
what's known and I really didn't believe
this I didn't want to believe this and I
envied the the ancient Scholars who
might have aspired to knowing everything
that was known at the time and what I
meant by knowing everything that was
known or understanding everything that
was understood is not that they knew in
detail everything that happened that
they had lists of things which they
remembered that's that's very far from
what I meant I meant that they
understood all the explanations that
were known
and I believe that we are not heading
away from an era in which
one might understand all the
explanations that are known but towards
it because we are continually unifying
and broadening and deepening
um our explanations of the world
[Music]
the universe university around us is
real
but it's only one small facet of reality
the whole of reality consists of many
such universes and they're all equally
real and we call the whole set the
Multiverse
[Music]
I studied physics at Cambridge and then
and after that I was always on the
borderline between different subjects I
studied
um
a Quantum field theory in an
astrophysics Department
and then I studied I I came to the
multi-universe theory in in the
relativity Center in the University of
Texas at Austin
and and then I was in the mathematical
Institute in Oxford
[Music]
all my research has always been on the
borderline between two subjects I
suppose the reason for that is that I'm
interested in
unifications and in broadening and
deepening
understanding of
everything
[Music]
respect
well this is my office I've never
actually been here before
why not because I work at home so I've
never used my office
[Music]
the Multiverse Theory comes about as an
explanation of the predictions of our
best Theory of physics which is quantum
mechanics
quantum mechanics makes very accurate
predictions the most accurate
predictions that any Theory of physics
has ever made
but if you want to explain why these
predictions are so how these physical
events come about there's no alternative
but to postulate that what we see around
us is not the whole of reality that
reality is much more varied and has a
great multiplicity this is what we call
multiple universes
but why between these multiple universes
once you take one of the classic
experiments of quantum mechanics
for instance the prediction of the
interference of light
now I can show you interference on a
simple laser which we can
what is it that forces us to believe in
parallel universes
I'll show you the experiment
this is an experiment
the very old one that's been
was first done hundreds of years ago
long before quantum theory was even
thought of it just involves Shining
Light through holes this is just a piece
of cardboard with little pin prick holes
in it
and there's one of them just a single
hole
this is a laser pointer that we use in
uh giving lectures
Shine the laser through the hole
and
the there's we can see a little spot on
the screen over there
and what would you expect to see you'd
expect to see just if there's one hole
you'd expect to see one spot but that's
already not true
you see quite a complicated pattern
it's called an interference pattern I'll
tell you why
suppose we what would happen if we made
a second hole
here's another place on the screen where
there are two holes
we get a completely different pattern
and through three holes
was a different pattern again
that's the pattern we get from four
holes
experiment has been known for for many
decades before quantum theory was even
thought of
but the key to quantum theory is what
happens when we perform this experiment
with very dim light
suppose we take the laser and we put in
front of it a dark filter
very dark filter so that so that very
few photons actually get through maybe
only one per second
and then
um we can't see that anymore but we have
instruments that can see it
so we put the instruments in the in
where we know the light beam is and when
the the detector is in a place where
photons are arriving it will start
clicking we'll go click click click if
we move it over slightly to a dark place
in the pattern it'll stop clicking
so we can that replaces our our eyes
now
um
the surprises that
even with this one Photon at a time
coming through the the holes the pattern
is exactly the same as it was when we
were shining the bright laser light
through well the question is
how do we explain the fact that we see
the same pattern with that we detect the
same pattern on the screen when there is
only one Photon at a time going through
here as we did when the bright laser
light was shining on it you see this one
Photon the one we detect must have gone
through one of those two holes
and
uh but but the place where it lands on
the screen depends on whether there is
one hole two holes or indeed three holes
however many holes there are each number
of holes makes a completely different
pattern on the screen so even when
there's only one Photon at a time coming
through
the place where it lands depends on what
other holes there are
and what we must conclude from this is
that something is coming through those
other holes and shoving our Photon aside
and that that process is interference
what is this something
well we can do further experiments to
find out what that something is
the conclusion that we draw is that this
thing behaves like light in every way we
can detect experimentally except one and
that is we can't detect it
so he's not there
it is there because it pushes aside the
light that we can see
and it behaves like light and
um the only reasonable conclusion is
that it is light of an invisible kind
now that doesn't take you all the way to
concluding that there are many universes
but the thing is quantum theory predicts
all this and in the equations of quantum
theory
these invisible bits of light appear in
the equations
and they are treated on in exactly the
same way as the light that we do see
what's more all particles behave like
this not just light but even the
particles in the screen the particles
that you and I are made of they all are
affected shoved aside by counterparts of
themselves that behave exactly like
those particles but cannot be seen
sodium somewhere else they are
um real matter real energy real light
that we cannot see and so they are an
entire parallel world of matter energy
and light that's why we call it a
parallel universe
and there are many of them in this
experiment we can see how many holes we
make
um there is a different pattern even
when one photon is going through there's
a different pattern for six holes for
seven holes for a hundred holes for a
thousand holes and that means that there
must be something traveling through
every one of those thousand holes and
making a difference to the photon that
we see
making thousands of parallel universes
and that means there must be at least
thousands of parallel universes in fact
the theory tells us there are a lot more
than that
[Music]
at the time of the Big Bang
according to Quantum Mechanics all the
universes came into existence but they
were all very alike
um and then with the interactions
between them interference and other
interactions caused them to become
different
are they real all the other universes
are as real as the one you and I are in
now
suppose you're right suppose we have
a lot of different and a lot of the same
universes all existing together
what would it mean
for me I mean am I a part of many
universes
um you have to start thinking of
yourself as not as an entity existing in
one universe but an entity existing in
the Multiverse as a whole and so there
are other copies of you and of me
in other universes some of them some of
these copies are completely identical to
us now in those cases it's really just a
matter of words to say whether they are
other universes or whether they're the
same universe if they're completely
identical
there are other universes which are very
like this one but differ only in the
position of one atom somewhere now those
universities are interfering with ours
and they are producing interference
effects which we could detect in the
laboratory if we wanted to and there are
others which are very different where
the interference is so small that we
will never see them but they form part
of the explanation of the things that we
do see
so you exist in multiple copies I exist
in multiple copies and there are some
universes in which I'm sitting here
talking to you about something slightly
different and there are other universes
where I've just got up and gone to have
a cup of tea
what makes me go into multiple copies in
multiple universes
you already exist in multiple copies
initially they are all identical and
then when a moment of choice happens
both the microscopic one and one made by
you consciously these identical copies
become different from one another
so suppose you're walking in Oxford and
you'll have to choose to go left or
right
in that case
for instance it could be that in half
the universes I go left and in half I go
right
and could you say that the Universe
splits up as soon as you go left or
right
it's not a matter of splitting this this
terminology of splitting is uh was the
way that the many University theory was
originally introduced when they thought
of there being a universe which then
splits into two universes but nowadays
it's better we find it better to think
of there being just a certain number of
universes perhaps an infinite number
already there
and then half of them do one thing and
half do another
[Music]
how do I know in which Universe I am or
how
do I even know who I am what I am if
there are multiple copies for me
that is a same question that one of a
pair of identical twins might say if if
there are two identical twins
um called Joe and Jack and Joe might ask
well why am I Joe and him jack
well the answer is
if you were Jack and he was Joe you'd
still be asking this question
the thing is the fact of the matter is
there are two of you
and they are identical
or they were identical until they
started to become different by having
different things happen to them and it's
the same with you and your counterparts
in other universes
they start off identical when they're
identical it doesn't make any difference
whether you call them one copy of you or
several but then when they start
becoming different
it is worth calling them different
versions of you slightly different
versions some of them in more distant
parts of the Multiverse will be so
different from you
that it isn't worth calling them you
anymore
sounds pretty bizarre actually
we have to get used to the fact that new
advances in science get further and
further away from common sense
if you want science merely to predict
the outcomes of experiments without
telling you why then you don't need to
believe in multiple universes in fact
you don't believe need to believe in
multiple planets you don't need to
believe that anything outside this room
exists if you only want to predict but
if you want to explain
then you must adopt the explanation
which meets the facts and in quantum
mechanics there is only one explanation
that meets the facts and that is the
multiple Universe explanation we can see
the behavior of things like photons
being affected by things we can't see
our only choice is to say it behaves as
if it were affected by those or to say
it really is affected by those
and it only makes sense to say it's
really affected because something that
doesn't exist surely can't affect things
that do exist
can I ask you a personal question is
there somebody who is busy with logic
and Mathematics and quantum theory
it looks rather messy around here yes
well you have to remember this is my
place of work
um I as you know I don't go to my office
so this is where I work I sit at my
computer and write the books that I've
been writing and then when I'm working
on other kinds of research if I receive
some papers then my filing system is my
flaw
but I know where everything is
[Music]
foreign
like immortality or perpetual motion
time travel is one of the enduring
fantasies of the human race
but until recently The View held by
scientists has been that time travel is
impossible not because there is any law
of physics forbidding it but because if
it were possible it would create all
sorts of paradoxes
the last time travel don't you
it's always fascinated me
ever since childhood I wanted to travel
in Doctor Who's time machine
um
you actually did
more recently I I made a film in which I
had the privilege of traveling in the
actual Tardis of Doctor Who to explain
how
the many universes interpretation of
quantum mechanics solves the problems
um which in science fiction are usually
thought to exist with um with time
travel the obstacles the paradoxes which
are usually thought to prevent time
travel actually do not prevent it if we
perform a proper quantum mechanical
analysis
[Music]
foreign
physics give the possibility of time
travel
we have to answer that as two questions
the first is
it physically possible to build a time
machine that is a path from the present
time into the past and the answer there
is it's still an open question but as
far as we know there are physical
processes which would allow the
um the tearing of the fabric of
space-time in such a way that there
would be a pathway into the past this
would involve something like a rotating
black hole some very violent event in
space-time
half of the question
is if we had such a pass would it be
possible actually to travel on it and
what would then happen in regard to the
paradoxes for instance what if we try to
change the past would the past be as it
is recorded or would it get changed if
for instance I go into the past and
prevent myself from ever entering the
time machine
or from even building the time machine
then what would
um what would happen would I prevent
myself if so who was it that went back
into the past to stop me
and if I couldn't what would stop me sir
I have a Time Quake approaching
[Music]
a paradox Louise you've changed the past
I know down why we can't change the past
it catches up with us there's apparently
a paradox and the resolution of the
Paradox is that when one does things
like that when one goes into the past
and changes things
um the result of that is that one goes
one has actually gone into the past of a
of a different universe
suppose we would have a time machine
would you go with it I don't think I
would
because
um
when you travel in time
one thing we do know is that you can't
get back to your original universe
so at the very least what would happen
is that I would end up in a universe
where there was another copy of me
the copy who hadn't set out in a time
machine
and in that Universe there'd be two
copies of me and in my original Universe
there'd be no copies of me
and that would mean that all my friends
and and the people I know
um in this universe
they would see me entering the time
machine and not come out
and from their point of view I would be
lost forever
there would be another group of the same
people in Another Universe they would
see have a one copy of me
and they would see a second copy arising
coming out of the time machine
and from then on they would be in the
company of two copies of me they might
not consider that to be an improvement
on one
[Music]
is the multi-universe theory testable
the
fact that we can't directly detect
parallel universes
is to some degree an accident of the way
we're built
if you wanted to
protect the motion of the Earth with
your human senses you wouldn't be able
to do so either
the way we detect the motion of the
earth is for instance by taking a long
pendulum Foucault's pendulum and letting
it hang for a while and in the course of
a few hours we see the plane of its
rotation changing
and this is because the plane actually
stays the same and the Earth is rotating
underneath it so this is an instrument
which detects the rotation of the Earth
if by chance our senses had contained an
instrument equivalent to this pendulum
we would be able to feel the rotation of
the Earth
in a similar way if our senses happen to
work through Quantum interference then
we would be able to feel directly
the influence of parallel universes so
saying that you don't feel other
universes is like the Inquisition saying
to Galileo that they don't feel the
Earth moving beneath their feet
well the reason why they didn't feel the
Earth moving beneath their feet is
because Galileo's Theory explains why
they won't feel it moving
but if they do a different experiment
with the fucos pendulum or with
telescopes they will indirectly be able
to tell that the Earth is moving
the core of every scientific Advance is
a better explanation now quantum
mechanics and the many universes
interpretation are our best explanation
of the physical world at the fundamental
level in fact I would say they are the
only current explanation of the physical
world at the fundamental level there are
no real rival explanations
we don't understand it fully yet and I
don't think one ever understands a
theory fully until one has its successor
one day there will be a successor to
Quantum Theory just as quantum theory
itself is the successor to classical
theories of physics
and then we will understand
the full implications of quantum theory
and where it went wrong
and I would expect again on the basis of
what usually happens in science we would
expect that future Theory to be even
Stranger Than quantum theory
all right
[Music]